Article: Prototyping in Rust (#52)
corrode/corrode.github.io: content/blog/prototyping/index.md

+++
title = "Prototyping in Rust"
date = 2024-11-27
draft = false
template = "article.html"
[extra]
hero = "hero.svg"
series = "Idiomatic Rust"
resources = [
    "[Excellent article on the topic for another perspective](https://vorner.github.io/2020/09/20/throw-away-code.html)",
]
+++

Contrary to popular belief, Rust is a joy for building prototypes.

For all its explicitness, Rust is surprisingly ergonomic and practical for prototyping.

> With a few tricks, you can quickly sketch out a solution and gradually add constraints without the compiler forcing you to work on edge cases and minute details up front or switch languages in the middle of the project.

Reviewer: "minute" can catch english-as-second-language and not so well versed native readers up. Try "miniscule" to avoid the time measuring thing ;-)

Author: I understand, but I like the expression a lot. Let's keep it. ^^

Reviewer 2: Happy medium: `minute details` -> [minutiae](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/minutia)

2. Memory safety gets in the way of prototyping.
3. Ownership and borrowing take out the fun of prototyping.
4. You have to get all the details right from the beginning. 

These are all [common misconceptions](https://medium.com/@victor.ronin/love-hate-relationship-with-rust-language-part-2-c36f57d5485d) and they are not true. 

It turns out you can avoid all of these pitfalls and still get a lot of value from prototyping in Rust. 
The interaction between types is the central part of the prototyping stage, and that's where Rust shines compared to other languages.

## Problems with Prototyping in Other Languages

If you're happy with a scripting language like Python, why bother with Rust?

That's a fair question.
After all, Python is known for its quick feedback loop and dynamic type system, and you can always rewrite the code in Rust later.

Yes, Python is a great choice for prototyping.
But I've been a Python developer for a long time, and I find that I very quickly grow out of the "prototype" phase – which is when the language falls apart for me.

One thing I found particularly challenging in Python was hardening my prototype into a robust, production-ready codebase.

> Exceptions are not obvious, the type system is weak, and I make mistakes while refactoring.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Exception sources are not obvious, the type system is weak, and I make mistakes while refactoring.
```

I often ended up with functions that could throw exceptions in unexpected places, which I would only discover when the program crashed in production.

I've found that the really hard bugs in Python are often type-related: deep down in your call chain, the program crashes because you passed the wrong type to a function. This happens frequently in practice, and it's especially frustrating when it occurs in a long-running process
after hours or days of operation.

It doesn't help that Python's type system feels tacked-on, so it won't catch these bugs effectively

> unless you spend some extra time on type annotations, which, of course, you don't do in the prototype phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It doesn't help that Python's type system feels tacked-on (because it is), so it won't catch these bugs effectively
unless you spend serious extra time on type annotations and fine tuning the Mypy config, which, of course, you don't do in the prototype phase.
```

Even putting these concerns aside, switching languages mid-project is a huge undertaking.
Maybe you'll have to maintain two codebases simultaneously for a while.
On top of that, Rust follows different idioms than Python, so you might have to rethink the software architecture.
And to make matters worse, you have to change build systems, testing frameworks, and deployment pipelines as well.

Wouldn't it be nice if you could use the same language for prototyping and production?

If you start with Rust, you could:

> 1. gradually improve the code quality by following the cargo's and [clippy's](https://doc.rust-lang.org/clippy/) suggestions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. gradually improve the code quality by following cargo's and [clippy's](https://doc.rust-lang.org/clippy/) suggestions
```

That's not necessarily a bad thing if the prototype turned out to be robust, but if it isn't, at least Rust gradually guides us toward a better design.
In a sense, it's like an outline for a book: I can ask others for feedback and improve it over time.

To me, it's super nice to have a single language I know well and can use for all stages of a project. 
A language that I can learn and understand all the way down to the implementation of the standard library (by going to the source code).
Other languages are often written in C/C++, and it's hard to understand what's going on under the hood.

When you explore a new language or domain, it's helpful to start with a prototype rather than aiming for a full-fledged production-ready solution right away.
Otherwise, you get stuck in minor details, and due to sunk cost fallacy, you don't want to throw away the code you wrote, so you end up keeping a suboptimal design.

Rust allows you to avoid these pitfalls by being very explicit about error conditions, but also by providing escape hatches in case you choose to ignore them for a while.

> Perhaps the most important point, however, is that at eventually management will say "ship it" and you'll have to live with the code you wrote.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Perhaps the most important point, however, is that eventually management will say "ship it" and you'll have to live with the code you wrote.
```

In an ideal world, you'd have plenty of time to perfect the code, but in reality, deadlines are tight and you have to make compromises.
If that's the case, a rewrite is often not an option.
Rust allows you to have a solid foundation from the beginning.
Even the first version is often good enough for production.

> With that out of the way, let's dive into the practical aspects of prototyping in Rust.

Reviewer: Time for an exclamation mark? Maybe a joke that we are already 4 chapters into a blog post and it's just about to begin?

Author: true. added a bit.

We can always make things more complex later if we need to -- the reverse is much harder.

Here's a quick reference for common prototype-to-production type transitions:

| Prototype        | Production          | When to switch                                                                     |
| ---------------- | ------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `String`         | `&str`              | When you need to avoid allocations or store string data with a clear lifetime      |
| `Vec<T>`         | `&[T]`              | When the owned vector becomes too expensive to clone or you can't afford the heap  |
| `Box<T>`         | `&T` or `&mut T`    | When `Box` becomes a bottleneck or you don't want to deal with heap allocations    | 
| `Rc<T>`          | `&T`                | When the reference counting overhead becomes too expensive or you need mutability  | 
| `Arc<Mutex<T>>`  | `&mut T`            | When you can guarantee exclusive access and don't need thread safety               |
| `String`         | `Cow<'static, str>` | When you want to optimize string reuse or avoid allocations                        |

> The prototype versions are easier to work with since they sidestep most ownership and lifetime issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These owned types sidestep most ownership and lifetime issues, but they do it by allocating memory on the heap - just like Python or JavaScript would.
```

You can always refactor when you need to optimize for performance or tighten up resource usage, but chances are you won't need to.

### Make use of type inference

Rust is a statically, strongly typed language.
It would be tedious to write out all the types all the time if it weren't for Rust's type inference.

You can often omit (also called "elide") the types and let the compiler figure it out from the context.

```rust
let x = 42;
let y = "hello";
let z = vec![1, 2, 3];
```

This is a great way to get started quickly and defer the decision about types to later.
The system scales well with more complex types, so you can use this technique even in larger projects.

```rust
let x: Vec<i32> = vec![1, 2, 3];
let y: Vec<i32> = vec![4, 5, 6];

> // Rust can infer the type of z

Author: ```suggestion
// Rust can infer the item type of z
```

> let z = x.iter().chain(y.iter()).collect::<Vec<_>>();

Reviewer: No, it can't. You have to tell it it's a Vec. You don't have to tell it the item type.

Author: That's a fair point.

```

Here's a more complex example which shows just how powerful Rust's type inference can be: 

```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

// Start with some nested data
let data = vec![
    ("fruits", vec!["apple", "banana"]),
    ("vegetables", vec!["carrot", "potato"]),
];

// Let Rust figure out this complex transformation
let categorized = data
    .into_iter()
    .flat_map(|(category, items)| {
        items.into_iter().map(move |item| (item, category))
    })
    .collect::<HashMap<_, _>>();

// categorized is now a HashMap<&str, &str> mapping items to their categories
println!("What type is banana? {}", categorized.get("banana").unwrap());
```

([Playground](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=fac339eecef40b69b919a1670a0a53df))

It's not easy to visualize the structure of `categorized` in your head, but Rust can do it for you!

### Use `unwrap` liberally

It's okay to use `unwrap` in the early stages of your project.
An explicit `unwrap` is like a stop sign that tells you "here's something you need to fix later."

> You can easily grep for `unwrap` and replace it with proper error handling when you polish your code.

Reviewer: Instead of grepping I would mention the clippy lint.

Author: I wanted to highlight the fact that one can find all occurrences with a simple search, because it's almost like a "keyword".

Reviewer: I would still mention that lint though. Especially for to remediate the fear of "but my colleagues will just go willy-nilly with those unwraps and I have to be on constant guard with my grep-foo!".

Author: Good point.

Author: Hold on, is there even a lint? I could only find an issue for it: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-clippy/issues/6636

Author: Nevermind...
https://rust-lang.github.io/rust-clippy/master/index.html#unwrap_used

Author: added

This way, you get the best of both worlds: quick iteration cycles and a clear path to robust error handling.

```rust
use std::fs;
use std::path::PathBuf;

fn main() {
    // Quick and dirty path handling during prototyping
    let home = std::env::var("HOME").unwrap();
    let config_path = PathBuf::from(home).join(".config").join("myapp");
    
    // Create config directory if it doesn't exist
    fs::create_dir_all(&config_path).unwrap();
    
    // Read the config file, defaulting to empty string if it doesn't exist
    let config_file = config_path.join("config.json");
    let config_content = fs::read_to_string(&config_file)
        .unwrap_or_default();
    
    // Parse the JSON config
    let config: serde_json::Value = if !config_content.is_empty() {
        serde_json::from_str(&config_content).unwrap()
    } else {
        serde_json::json!({})
    };
    
    println!("Loaded config: {:?}", config);
}
```

See all those unwraps?

> They stand out like a sore thumb -- and that's a good thing!

Reviewer: Not to the untrained eye they don't. People unfamiliar with Rust will tell you you are crazy.

Author: Fair point. I've qualified it a bit with "To more experienced Rustaceans, they stand out like a sore thumb -- and that's a good thing!"

> Each `unwrap` is a stop sign that tells us that we have to be careful here.

Reviewer: Duplicated in the paragraph before the code.

Compare that to languages like JavaScript which can throw exceptions your way at any time.
It's much harder to ensure that you handle all the edge-cases correctly.
At the very least, it costs time. Time you could spend on more important things.

While prototyping with Rust, you can safely ignore error handling and focus on
the happy path without losing track of potential flaws.

> ### Use `cargo-watch` or `bacon` for quick feedback cycles

Reviewer: Just drop any hint to cargo-watch since it's deprecated.

You could mention `watchexec` or `entr` though.

Author: watchexec: Maintenance status: on hold.
entr looks solid, but the Rust integration is not as deep.
I'll just drop cargo-watch.

Reviewer: watchexec is less on hold than cargo-watch, and not having a "deep rust integration" is a bonus in my book. Unix philosophy and all ;-)

However, for small projects, the compile times are negligible.
Unfortunately, you have to manually run `cargo run` every time you make a change 
or use [rust-analyzer](https://rust-analyzer.github.io/) in your editor to get instant feedback.

To fill the gap, you can use external tools like [`bacon`](https://github.com/Canop/bacon) to automatically recompile and run your code whenever you make a change.
This way, you can get *almost* the same experience as with a REPL in, say, Python or Ruby.

The setup is simple:

```sh
# Install bacon
cargo install --locked bacon

# Run bacon in your project directory
bacon
```

And just like that, you can get some pretty compilation output alongside your code editor.

![bacon](bacon.png)

### Use the Rust playground

You probably already know about the [Rust Playground](https://play.rust-lang.org).
It is great for working on small code snippets.
I find it quite useful for quickly noting down a bunch of functions or types to test out a design idea. 
The playground doesn't support auto-complete, but it's still great when you're on the go and don't have access to your full-fledged development environment.

> ### `cargo-script` is awesome

Reviewer: :heart:

Did you know that cargo can also run scripts?

For example, put this into a file called `script.rs`:

```rust
#!/usr/bin/env cargo +nightly -Zscript

fn main() {
    println!("Hello prototyping world");
}
```

Now you can make the file executable with `chmod +x script.rs` and run it with `./script.rs` which it will compile and execute your code!
This allows you to quickly test out ideas without having to create a new project.
There is support for dependencies as well.

At the moment, `cargo-script` is a nightly feature, but it will be released soon on stable Rust.
You can read more about it in the [RFC](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/3424-cargo-script.html).

### Don't Worry About Performance

You have to try really really hard to write slow code in Rust.
Use that to your advantage: during the prototype phase, try to keep the code as simple as possible; you can always optimize later.

I gave a talk titled ["The Four Horsemen of Bad Rust Code"](https://github.com/corrode/four-horsemen-talk) where I

> mentioned that premature optimization is one of the worst things you can do in Rust. 

Reviewer: Mentioned? What should I care if you've said this somewhere else already? If you have "demonstrated" or "explained" it, that's different. But just saying it there as well doesn't get me to click the link.

Author: True. Rephrased that.

> Especially experienced developers coming from C or C++ might be tempted to optimize too early.

Reviewer: Why? (I guess because refactoring into the more performant types is more painful there)

Author: Good point. Added a clarification. Does it sound better now?

Author: > Rust makes code perform well by default - you get memory safety at virtually zero runtime cost. When developers try to optimize too early, they often fight the borrow checker by using complex lifetime annotations and intricate reference patterns in pursuit of better performance.
This leads to harder-to-maintain code that may not actually run faster.

While prototyping, this can obfuscate simpler designs and make refactoring harder later on.
Resist the urge to optimize too early.
You will thank yourself later. [^1]

[^1]: In the talk, I show an example where early over-optimization led to the wrong abstraction and made the code slower. The actual bottleneck was elsewhere and hard to uncover without profiling.

### Use `println!` and `dbg!` for debugging 

I find that printing values is pretty handy while prototyping.
It's one less context switch to make compared to starting a debugger.

Most people use `println!` for that, but [`dbg!`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/macro.dbg.html) has a few advantages:

> - It prints the file name and line number where the macro is called.

Reviewer: Why is that a benefit? Sounds like unneeded clutter on my screen.

Author: Added "This helps you quickly find the source of the output." I thin that's an advantage. At least it is to me. ;)

Reviewer: Another advantage to me is you don't have to add "pre-x" und "post-x" marks if you want to inspect how a value changed. Or an expression in a loop with conditionals or what not.

But an explanation was necessary.

- It outputs the expression as well as its value.
- It's less syntax-heavy than `println!`; e.g. `dbg!(x)` vs. `println!("{x:?}")`.

> - It's only active in debug builds, so you don't have to worry about removing it later.

Reviewer: Not quite sure that's true. Test output from a function deep in my call stack during development would still put me off.

Author: True. I wanted to say that it had no performance impact. Let me clarify.

Where `dbg!` really shines is in recursive functions or when you want to see the intermediate values during an iteration:

```rust
fn factorial(n: u32) -> u32 {
    // `dbg!` returns the argument, 
    // so you can use it in the middle of an expression
    if dbg!(n <= 1) {
        dbg!(1)
    } else {
        dbg!(n * factorial(n - 1))

>     }

Reviewer: First time I'm seeing this. I love it already!

[src/main.rs:3:9] 1 = 1
[src/main.rs:7:9] n * factorial(n - 1) = 2
[src/main.rs:7:9] n * factorial(n - 1) = 6
[src/main.rs:7:9] n * factorial(n - 1) = 24
[src/main.rs:9:1] factorial(4) = 24
```

If you're interested, here are [more details on how to use that handy `dbg!` macro](https://edgarluque.com/blog/rust-dbg-macro/).

### Play With Types

Quite frankly, the type system is one of the main reasons I love Rust.
It feels great to express my ideas in types and see them come to life.
I would encourage you to heavily lean into the type system during the prototyping phase.

Try to build up a vocabulary of concepts and own types which describe your system. 
In the beginning, you won't have a good idea of the types in your system.
That's fine!
Start with *something* and quickly sketch out solutions and gradually add constraints to model the business requirements.
Don't stop until you find a version that feels just right. [^2]

[^2]: I usually know when I found a good abstraction once I can use all of Rust's features like expression-oriented programming and pattern matching together with my own types. The types feel like a natural extension of the language and fit in seamlessly.

> Let's look at an example:

Reviewer: The example doesn't convince me. It focuses too much on the embedding instead of making invalid state unrepresentable for example.

Author: Maybe it would help if I explain why going from `String` to an own type can help prevent errors. On the flip side, coming up with a good set of types is not easy -- and maybe that's the entire point: you need to play with types until you find a combination of types that work well together. So the example might confuse people and be beside the point I'm trying to make.

I could see myself writing a long paragraph about types alone here, and that would be highly distracting. If we can come up with a simpler example, which emphasizes my point while keeping it short and focused, that would help. Open for ideas.

Author: How about now? Tried my best to come up with a better example.

Therefore it's better to be conservative and use concrete types instead of generics until necessary. 

So instead of writing this:

```rust
fn foo<T>(x: T) -> T {
    x
}
```

Write this:

```rust
fn foo(x: i32) -> i32 {
    x
}
```

If you need the same function for a different type, feel free to just copy and paste the function and change the type. 
This way, you avoid the trap of settling on the wrong kind of abstraction too early.
Maybe the two functions only differ by type signature for now, but they might serve a completely different purpose.
If the function is not generic from the start, it's easier to remove the duplication later. 

Only introduce generics when you see a clear pattern emerge in multiple places.

Also avoid "fancy" generic type signatures:

```rust
fn foo<T: AsRef<str>>(x: T) -> String {
    x.as_ref().to_string()
}
```

Yes, this allows you to pass in a `&str` or a `String`, but it's also harder to read.

Better use an owned type for your first implementation:

```rust
fn foo(x: String) -> String {
    x
}
```

Chances are, you won't need the flexibility at all.

In summary, generics are powerful, but they can make the code harder to read and write.

> Stay clear of them until you have a good idea of what you're doing. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Avoid them until you have a clear idea of what you're doing. 
```

I often think my ideas are good. They are mine after all! But it much more objective to classify them as clear or not.

    content: String,
}

fn create_note() -> Note {  // ✓ just works
    Note {
        title: String::from("Draft"),
        content: String::from("My first note")
    }
}
```

If you have a type that you need to move between threads (i.e. it needs to be `Send`), you can use `Arc<Mutex<T>>` to get around the borrow checker.
If you're worried about performance, remember that other languages like Python or Java do this implicitly behind your back.

```rust
use std::sync::{Arc, Mutex};
use std::thread;

let note = Arc::new(Mutex::new(Note {
    title: String::from("Draft"),
    content: String::from("My first note")
}));

let note_clone = Arc::clone(&note);
thread::spawn(move || {
    let mut note = note_clone.lock().unwrap();
    note.content.push_str(" with additions");
});
```

([Playground](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=4b93a53ebc1d7ee6bc2b39c91543fba7))

### Use A Flat Module Hierarchy

Your `main.rs` is a great place for the entire prototype. 
That's fine because you can always split it up later as soon as this becomes "uncomfortable."
By then, you have a clear vision of what things should be called and how they should interact.

> I keep modules in the same file until they grow too large:

Reviewer: By this point I didn't expect to use modules, but to have all functions and structs in the same scope. Maybe rephrase the header or previous paragraph? Seeing the `mod` keyword in the example surprised me a little.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, if you have the capacity to think of modules , at that point just put them n a different file. Would refactor the whole point to say it's fine to just dump the whole code in a `main`

Author: Yeah, the headline needs to be changed. I will just say "flat hierarchy."
I still believe that there's a point to be made about the `mod` keyword being helpful for prototypes as well. I like to sketch out the module structure in `main`. It's great that Rust allows me to nest modules in a single file. It allows for quicker iteration cycles, because it's easier to move stuff around and at the same time I can build up a quick prototype of the hierarchy to see how it "feels." So I think I'll keep that, but mention it later in the section.

Author: Done

When I'm working on a library, this helps me to quickly test the API and see if the naming makes sense and if the modules are structured correctly.
E.g. I might have a `config` module with a `load` function that returns a `Config` struct, which gets used by the `server` module to start the server. 

```rust
mod config {
    pub struct Config {
        pub port: u16,
    }

    pub fn load() -> Config {
        Config { port: 8080 }
    }
}

mod server {
    use crate::config;

    pub struct Server {
        config: config::Config,
    }

    impl Server {
        pub fn new(config: config::Config) -> Self {
            Server { config }
        }

        pub fn start(&self) {
            println!("Starting server on port {}", self.config.port);
        }
    }
}

use server::Server;

fn main() {
    let config = config::load();
    let server = Server::new(config);
    server.start();
}
```

In general, I try to keep a flat hierarchy in the beginning and only introduce more structure when it becomes necessary.
See also [Matklad's article on large Rust workspaces](https://matklad.github.io/2021/08/22/large-rust-workspaces.html).

## Summary

> That's it!

Reviewer: You make it sound like it's 3 simple tricks :joy: 

Maybe make an actual summary? You can have all the tradeoffs that Java and Python make for quick prototyping if you want to, but then you have a clear path to rock solid code that doesn't involve a complete rewrite.

Author: Want to keep the summary short, but I see what you mean. I'll expand it a bit.

Author: Expanded!

Here are some typical misbeliefs: 

1. Rust always requires you to handle errors.
2. Memory safety gets in the way of prototyping.
3. Ownership and borrowing take out the fun of prototyping.
4. You have to get all the details right from the beginning. 

These are all [common misconceptions](https://medium.com/@victor.ronin/love-hate-relationship-with-rust-language-part-2-c36f57d5485d) and they are not true. 

It turns out you can avoid all of these pitfalls and still get a lot of value from prototyping in Rust. 
The interaction between types is the central part of the prototyping stage, and that's where Rust shines compared to other languages.

## Problems with Prototyping in Other Languages

If you're happy with a scripting language like Python, why bother with Rust?

That's a fair question.
After all, Python is known for its quick feedback loop and dynamic type system, and you can always rewrite the code in Rust later.

Yes, Python is a great choice for prototyping.
But I've been a Python developer for a long time, and I find that I very quickly grow out of the "prototype" phase – which is when the language falls apart for me.

> One thing I found particularly challenging in Python was hardening my prototype into a robust, production-ready codebase.

Reviewer 2: This is indeed the case, but the article is about prototyping, not day 2, not sure you want this paragraph and I'd maybe even adjust the one below

Author: True. I'll clean that up.

Author: Modified.

I've found that the really hard bugs in Python are often type-related: deep down in your call chain, the program crashes because you passed the wrong type to a function. This happens frequently in practice, and it's especially frustrating when it occurs in a long-running process
after hours or days of operation.

It doesn't help that Python's type system feels tacked-on (because it is), so it won't catch these bugs effectively
unless you spend serious extra time on type annotations and fine tuning the Mypy config, which, of course, you don't do in the prototype phase.

Even putting these concerns aside, switching languages mid-project is a huge undertaking.
Maybe you'll have to maintain two codebases simultaneously for a while.
On top of that, Rust follows different idioms than Python, so you might have to rethink the software architecture.
And to make matters worse, you have to change build systems, testing frameworks, and deployment pipelines as well.

Wouldn't it be nice if you could use the same language for prototyping and production?

If you start with Rust, you could:

> 1. gradually improve the code quality by following cargo's and [clippy's](https://doc.rust-lang.org/clippy/) suggestions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. gradually improve the code quality by following rustc's and [clippy's](https://doc.rust-lang.org/clippy/) suggestions
```

- fast feedback loop
- changing your mind is easy
- it's simple to use if you ignore the edge cases
- there is very little boilerplate
- it's easy to experiment and refactor
- you can write a script in a few lines
- no compilation step 

The goal is to get as close to that experience in Rust as possible while staying true to Rust's core principles.
We want to make changes quick and painless and rapidly iterate on your design without painting ourselves into a corner.

## Tips And Tricks For Prototyping In Rust

### Start small

It turns out you can model a surprisingly large system with just a few types and functions!
The main idea is to defer all the unnecessary parts to later by using a "simple Rust" if you will.

It's possible, but you need to switch off your inner critic who always wants to write perfect code from the beginning.
Don't let perfect be the enemy of good.
Rust enables you to comfortably defer perfection.
You can make the rough edges obvious so that you can sort them out later.

One of the biggest mistakes I observe is an engineer's perfectionist instinct to jump on minor details which don't have a broad enough impact to warrant the effort.

> Take a step back and focus on the big picture.

Reviewer 2: Mention getting an end to end flow working first, or at least something slightly less vague

Author: Noted, thanks.

Author: Done.

let x = 42;
let y = "hello";
let z = vec![1, 2, 3];
```

This is a great way to get started quickly and defer the decision about types to later.
The system scales well with more complex types, so you can use this technique even in larger projects.

```rust
let x: Vec<i32> = vec![1, 2, 3];
let y: Vec<i32> = vec![4, 5, 6];

// Rust can infer the item type of z
let z = x.iter().chain(y.iter()).collect::<Vec<_>>();
```

Here's a more complex example which shows just how powerful Rust's type inference can be: 

```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

// Start with some nested data
let data = vec![
    ("fruits", vec!["apple", "banana"]),
    ("vegetables", vec!["carrot", "potato"]),
];

// Let Rust figure out this complex transformation
let categorized = data
    .into_iter()
    .flat_map(|(category, items)| {
        items.into_iter().map(move |item| (item, category))
    })
    .collect::<HashMap<_, _>>();

// categorized is now a HashMap<&str, &str> mapping items to their categories
println!("What type is banana? {}", categorized.get("banana").unwrap());
```

([Playground](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=fac339eecef40b69b919a1670a0a53df))

> It's not easy to visualize the structure of `categorized` in your head, but Rust can do it for you!

Reviewer 2: Should mention turning on inlay type hints in the editor

Author: Yes! Very much agree.
https://www.jetbrains.com/help/rust/viewing-reference-information.html#inlay-hints
Note to self: add the screenshot from that page with a link back to the article.

For VSCode I only found an official guide for TypeScript: https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/typescript/typescript-editing#_inlay-hints. Might be good enough as a starting point.

Author: Done. Thanks for the idea.

> ### Use `unwrap` liberally

Reviewer 2: Idea: as a subpoint, mention how [anyhow](https://crates.io/crates/anyhow) lets you do this even faster

Author: I thought of that. Still undecided. 🤔 Main focus was on the standard library. But yeah, I do that all the time, where I pull in `anyhow` to make prototyping faster.

- It outputs the expression as well as its value.
- It's less syntax-heavy than `println!`; e.g. `dbg!(x)` vs. `println!("{x:?}")`.
- It's only active in debug builds, so you don't have to worry about removing it later.

Where `dbg!` really shines is in recursive functions or when you want to see the intermediate values during an iteration:

```rust
fn factorial(n: u32) -> u32 {
    // `dbg!` returns the argument, 
    // so you can use it in the middle of an expression
    if dbg!(n <= 1) {
        dbg!(1)
    } else {
        dbg!(n * factorial(n - 1))
    }
}

dbg!(factorial(4));
```

The output is nice and tidy:

```rust
[src/main.rs:2:8] n <= 1 = false
[src/main.rs:2:8] n <= 1 = false
[src/main.rs:2:8] n <= 1 = false
[src/main.rs:2:8] n <= 1 = true
[src/main.rs:3:9] 1 = 1
[src/main.rs:7:9] n * factorial(n - 1) = 2
[src/main.rs:7:9] n * factorial(n - 1) = 6
[src/main.rs:7:9] n * factorial(n - 1) = 24
[src/main.rs:9:1] factorial(4) = 24
```

If you're interested, here are [more details on how to use that handy `dbg!` macro](https://edgarluque.com/blog/rust-dbg-macro/).

> ### Play With Types

Reviewer 2: I see the biggest advantage of the type system during prototyping that although it takes a bit longer to fidget with it, you end up having to do less iterations on the same part. Not sure I am making a clear point, so let's try: rust takes 3 units of time to iterate over how to structure data, python takes 2. However, with rust you need 2 iterations for 6 total units, with python you need 4 for a total of 8

Author: Wonder how I could phrase this. I'll give it a shot, but feel free to make a suggestion.

Author: I've integrated that into the text.

When I'm working on a library, this helps me to quickly test the API and see if the naming makes sense and if the modules are structured correctly.
E.g. I might have a `config` module with a `load` function that returns a `Config` struct, which gets used by the `server` module to start the server. 

```rust
mod config {
    pub struct Config {
        pub port: u16,
    }

    pub fn load() -> Config {
        Config { port: 8080 }
    }
}

mod server {
    use crate::config;

    pub struct Server {
        config: config::Config,
    }

    impl Server {
        pub fn new(config: config::Config) -> Self {
            Server { config }
        }

        pub fn start(&self) {
            println!("Starting server on port {}", self.config.port);
        }
    }
}

use server::Server;

fn main() {
    let config = config::load();
    let server = Server::new(config);
    server.start();
}
```

In general, I try to keep a flat hierarchy in the beginning and only introduce more structure when it becomes necessary.
See also [Matklad's article on large Rust workspaces](https://matklad.github.io/2021/08/22/large-rust-workspaces.html).

> ## Summary

Reviewer 2: The article gave me vibes similar to [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CV5CjUlcqsw), not sure if you were inspired by it or wanna reference it

Author: I've seen the video a few years ago, but completely forgot about it. Many good points in there that I also mentioned. Will add it to the references, thanks!

Author: Added

That's it!

Rust makes for an all-around great language, from prototyping all the way to production.

Gradual improvement is very pleasant in Rust.
This way, you get the best of both worlds: you can quickly iterate on your design, but you can also make the code more robust over time.
You can do all of this without sacrificing the advantages of Rust.

> It turns out, even "bad" Rust code is pretty decent compared to code I wrote in other languages; it's still safe and fast, covers most cases, and I have an easier time refactoring it later because flaws are more obvious (capital-case types, missing error handling, explicit allocations with `Box` and all).

Reviewer 2: Got an article about the joys and ease of refactoring in rust? Would be great to link to it here

Author: Not yet, but it would be a good addition.

Author: I've added it to my to-do list.

| Transition to Production  | ❌ Need extensive testing to catch type errors<br>❌ Often requires rewrite in another language<br>❌ Performance optimization needed | ✓ Same code can go to production<br>✓ Already has good performance<br>✓ Memory safety guaranteed                          |
| Maintenance               | ❌ Type errors surface during runtime<br>❌ Refactoring is risky<br>❌ Documentation can get out of sync                              | ✓ Compiler catches most issues<br>✓ Safe refactoring with type system<br>✓ Types serve as documentation                   |
| Debugging                 | ✓ Interactive debugger<br>✓ Easy print debugging                                                            | ✓ `dbg!` macro<br>✓ Compile-time catches most bugs                                                                                                 |
| Code Evolution            | ❌ Hard to maintain large codebases<br>❌ Type issues compound                                                                      | ✓ Compiler guides improvements<br>✓ Types help manage complexity                         |

> | Collaboration             | ❌ Implicit assumptions about types<br>❌ Easy to break others' code<br>✓ Lower learning curve                                       | ✓ Explicit contracts through types<br>✓ Compiler prevents many conflicts<br>⚠️ Steeper learning curve                      |

Reviewer: There are some, let's say "disingenuous" points against Python here.

- If type inference helps Rust, the dynamic typing in Python should be worth a point too.
- There absolutely are tools like `bacon` for Python, watching for files is not a Rust + Node oligopol.
- Rust has runtime panics too
- You wrote a whole chapter about `.unwrap()` in prototyping code, now you say "same code can go into production"?
- Documentation in Rust can go out of sync just the same as in Python.

Debugging, Code Evolution, and Collaboration seem very genuine. Maintenance except for the docs point too. But the others are a very bad comparison.

Author: Noted. Will update.

Author: Applied fixes

The beauty of prototyping in Rust is that your "rough drafts" are often already production-worthy.

> Even when I liberally use `unwrap()`, stick everything in `main.rs`, and reach for owned types everywhere, the resulting code is still memory-safe and reasonably fast.

Reviewer: "production-worthy" is absolutely the wrong phrase here. Production ought to be rock solid, and my `.unwrap()` laden prototype isn't. But it is on-par with my Python prototype in reliability, but outperforms it easily, making the experiment in production potentially cheaper.

{% info(headline="Things you'll learn") %}

- How to prototype rapidly in Rust while keeping its safety guarantees
- Practical techniques to maintain a quick feedback loop
- Patterns that help you evolve prototypes into production code

{% end %}

## Why People Think Rust Is Not Good For Prototyping

The common narrative goes like this:

> When you start writing a program, you don't know what you want and you change your mind pretty often.
> Rust pushes back when you change your mind because the type system is very strict.
> On top of that, getting your idea to compile takes longer than in other languages, so the feedback loop is slower.

I've found that developers not yet too familiar with Rust often share this preconception.
These developers stumble over the strict type system and the borrow checker while trying to sketch out a solution.
They believe that with Rust you're either at 0% or 100% done (everything works and has no undefined behavior) and there's nothing in between.

Here are some typical misbeliefs: 

1. "Memory safety and prototyping just don't go together."

> 2. "Ownership and borrowing take out the fun of prototyping."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. "Ownership and borrowing take the fun out of prototyping."
```

| Transition to Production  | ❌ Need extensive testing to catch type errors<br>❌ Bad performance might require extra work or rewrite in another language | ✓ Minimal changes needed beyond error handling<br>✓ Already has good performance<br>✓ Memory safety guaranteed             |
| Maintenance               | ❌ Type errors surface during runtime<br>❌ Refactoring is risky                              | ✓ Compiler catches most issues<br>✓ Safe refactoring with type system              |
| Code Evolution            | ❌ Hard to maintain large codebases<br>❌ Type issues compound                                                                      | ✓ Compiler guides improvements<br>✓ Types help manage complexity                                                          |

Quite frankly, Rust makes for an excellent prototyping language if you embrace its strengths.
Yes, the type system will make you think harder about your design up front - but that's actually a good thing!

> Each iteration might take a bit longer than in Python or JavaScript, but you'll typically need fewer iterations to reach a solid design.

Reviewer: "a solid design" might just be all you want out of a prototype, that doesn't mean it's production worthy, only it's design. I think you mean something along the lines of "surpassing prototype quality" or "reach production worthiness".

```suggestion
Each iteration might take a bit longer than in Python or JavaScript, but you'll typically need fewer iterations from prototyping to production.
```

Author: yes, changed

+++
title = "Prototyping in Rust"
date = 2024-12-03
draft = false
template = "article.html"
[extra]
# hero = "hero.svg"
series = "Idiomatic Rust"
resources = [
    "[Throw away code - Vorner's blog](https://vorner.github.io/2020/09/20/throw-away-code.html)",
    "[RustConf 2021 - The Importance of Not Over-Optimizing in Rust by Lily Mara](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CV5CjUlcqsw)",
    "[Rust Nation UK - Easy Mode Rust by Andre Bogus](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=33FG6O3qejM)",
]
reviews = [
    { name = "Theodor-Alexandru Irimia", url = "https://github.com/tirimia" },
]
+++

> Programming is an iterative process - as much as we like to come up with the perfect solution from the start, it rarely works that way.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Programming is an iterative process - as much as we would like to come up with the perfect solution from the start, it rarely works that way.
```

Whether you're writing games, CLI tools, or designing library APIs, prototyping helps tremendously in finding the best approach before committing to a design.
It helps reveal the patterns behind more idiomatic code.

Contrary to popular belief, Rust is a joy for building prototypes.

> For all its explicitness, Rust is surprisingly ergonomic when iterating on ideas.

Reviewer 3: Reads a bit weird to me, with the two very short paragraphs. Maybe:
```suggestion
For all its explicitness, Rust is surprisingly ergonomic when iterating on ideas. Contrary to popular belief, it is a joy for building prototypes.
```

Reviewer 3: Or maybe:
```suggestion
For all its explicitness, Rust is surprisingly ergonomic when iterating on ideas. Contrary to popular belief, using it for building prototypes is a joy!
```

You don't need to be a Rust expert to be productive - in fact, many of the techniques we'll discuss specifically help you *sidestep* Rust's more advanced features.
If you focus on simple patterns and make use of Rust's excellent tooling, even less experienced Rust developers can quickly bring their ideas to life.

## Why People Think Rust Is Not Good For Prototyping

The common narrative goes like this:

> When you start writing a program, you don't know what you want and you change your mind pretty often.
> Rust pushes back when you change your mind because the type system is very strict.
> On top of that, getting your idea to compile takes longer than in other languages, so the feedback loop is slower.

> That's why people believe that Rust isn't a good fit for prototyping.

Reviewer 3: The paragraph/sentence seems redundant with the header of this section. I'd leave it out.

> I've found that developers from other languages and Rust beginners often share this preconception about Rust.

Reviewer 3: Two notes:
- "developers from other languages and Rust beginners" seems redundant?
- The repetition of "Rust" doesn't read very smoothly to me.

Maybe just:
```suggestion
I've found that developers new to Rust often share this preconception.
```

Or:
```suggestion
I've found that developers coming to Rust from other languages often share this preconception.
```

These developers stumble over the strict type system and the borrow checker while trying to sketch out a solution.
They believe that with Rust you're either at 0% or 100% done (everything works and has no undefined behavior) and there's nothing in between.

Here are some typical misbeliefs: 

1. "Memory safety and prototyping just don't go together."
2. "Ownership and borrowing take out the fun of prototyping."
3. "You have to get all the details right from the beginning."
4. "Rust always requires you to handle errors."

These are all [common misconceptions](https://medium.com/@victor.ronin/love-hate-relationship-with-rust-language-part-2-c36f57d5485d) and they are not true. 

**It turns out you can avoid all of these pitfalls and still get a lot of value from prototyping in Rust.**

> ## What Makes Rust Great for Prototyping?

Reviewer 3: I'm not so sure about this section and its placement. You already introduced what you present as misconceptions, and now you're just telling me the opposite is true, without further proof.

I'm not sure what to do instead. Maybe shorten this (there's a redundant list further down anyway, as I'm calling out there), or explicitly call out that the purpose of this section is tell the reader why they should bother with Rust for prototyping, and that lots of proof will follow.

Or maybe consider this section (maybe even an expanded form of it) for an appendix, or a follow-up article?

Author: Thanks. I dramatically shortened this section and hinting at what is to come.

### Solid Foundation From The Beginning

In an ideal world, you'd have plenty of time to perfect your code, but in reality, deadlines are tight and you have to make compromises.

Eventually management will say "ship it" and you'll have to live with the code you wrote.
If that's the case, a rewrite is often not an option.

Rust allows you to have a solid foundation from the start.
Even the first version is often good enough for production.

### Strong Safety Guarantees 

Rust allows you to avoid many pitfalls by being very explicit about error conditions, but also by providing escape hatches in case you choose to ignore them for a while.
This saves you a lot of time hunting down bugs later on.

### Single Language for Everything

To me, it's super nice to have a single language I know well and can use for all stages of a project. 

> A language that I can learn and understand all the way down to the implementation of the standard library itself (simply by reading to the source code).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A language that I can learn and understand all the way down to the implementation of the standard library itself (simply by reading the source code).
```

Other languages are often written in C/C++, and it's hard to understand what's going on under the hood.

### Great Teaching Tool

I prototype in Rust frequently when I need to explain systems-level concepts to clients or sketch out a prototype for a new project of my own.
It's a great way to test my assumptions before I invest too much time in a flawed design. 

> ## Problems with Prototyping in Other Languages

Reviewer 3: I have similar doubts about this section, as I have about the previous one. Some notes:

- It seems like it should come before the previous one, maybe? Showing me why Python is not so perfect for prototyping is a perfect setup for why I should consider Rust.
- You're spending a lot of words here on Python before getting into the core of the article, how to use Rust for prototyping.
- Maybe condense this down, merge it with the condensed version of the previous section, and leave any details for an appendix or follow-up article?

Author: Thanks. I switched the two sections and it reads much better now.

However, I find that I want to give the reader some context of where I come from (Python) in the hope to make the article more relatable. However, the opposite might happen and people loose interest. It's a fine line! I will ponder about that some more. For now, I'll keep it in.

(*It might help to know that I'm planning to write more long-form content in the future and that the content might be used for an ebook / short book eventually.*)

One thing I found particularly challenging in Python was hardening my prototype into a robust, production-ready codebase.
I've found that the really hard bugs in Python are often type-related: deep down in your call chain, the program crashes because you passed the wrong type to a function. 
Because of that, I find myself wanting to switch to something more robust as soon as my prototype starts to take shape. 

The problem is that switching languages mid-project is a *huge* undertaking.
Maybe you'll have to maintain two codebases simultaneously for a while.
On top of that, Rust follows different idioms than Python, so you might have to rethink the software architecture.
And to make matters worse, you have to change build systems, testing frameworks, and deployment pipelines as well.

Wouldn't it be nice if you could use a single language for prototyping and production?

## What A Solid Rust Prototyping Workflow Looks Like

If you start with Rust, you get a lot of benefits out of the box:

1. A robust codebase right from the start
2. Strong type system that catches errors early and helps with refactoring
3. Built-in linting (rustc and [clippy]) to gradually improve code quality

> 4. The ability to ship prototypes for early feedback

Reviewer 3: This list repeat some of the points that were mentioned not much earlier, but also adds new ones. Why have two partially redundant lists in different places?

Author: True. I'll remove it.

[clippy]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/clippy/

All without having to change languages mid-project!
It saves you the context switch between languages once you're done with the prototype.

<img src="flow.svg" alt="flow" class="natural">

Python has a few good traits that we can learn from:

- fast feedback loop
- changing your mind is easy
- it's simple to use if you ignore the edge cases
- there is very little boilerplate
- it's easy to experiment and refactor
- you can do something useful in just a few lines
- no compilation step 

The goal is to get as close to that experience in Rust as possible while staying true to Rust's core principles.

> Let's make changes quick and painless and rapidly iterate on your design without painting ourselves into a corner.

Reviewer 3: I think there's a weird contrast between "your design" and "ourselves". It's a small thing, and I'm not sure it is worth thinking. But I guess the article could be a tiny bit more cohesive, if we decided whether we're working on something together with the reader, or giving them tips about their design.

Author: Exactly. I changed it to "our" as in "Let's make changes quick and painless and rapidly iterate on our design without painting ourselves into a corner."
Will check the other sentences as well.

## Tips And Tricks For Prototyping In Rust

> ### Start small

Reviewer 3: You've switched to a different style of capitalizing titles here.

```suggestion
### Start Small
```

Author: Yeah, the font is uppercase at the moment, which hides that flaw. Nevertheless, I might use sentence-case for H3 in the future.

> There's some overlap between prototyping and "[easy Rust](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=33FG6O3qejM)."

Reviewer 3: Putting this first kinda assumes that the reader is familiar with the concept of "easy Rust", or wants to click on that link right now. I'd move this further down. Start with the second paragraph, or maybe "switch off your inner critic", which I think could be the stronger introduction here.

Easy Rust (and references to external material) can come at the end of the section, when the reader understands what your point here is, and whether they want to learn more about it.

Author: OH, that's a good idea!

It's possible, but you need to switch off your inner critic who always wants to write perfect code from the beginning.
Rust enables you to comfortably defer perfection.
You can make the rough edges obvious so that you can sort them out later.
Don't let perfect be the enemy of good.

One of the biggest mistakes I observe is an engineer's perfectionist instinct to jump on minor details which don't have a broad enough impact to warrant the effort.
It's better to have a working prototype with a few rough edges than a perfect implementation of a small part of the system.

Remember: you are exploring!
Use a coarse brush to paint the landscape first.
Try to get into a flow state where you can quickly iterate.
Don't get distracted by the details too early.
During this phase, it's also fine to throw away a lot failed attempts. 

### Use Simple Types

Even while prototyping, the type system is not going away.
There are ways to make this a blessing rather than a curse.

Use simple types like `i32`, `String`, `Vec` in the beginning.
We can always make things more complex later if we have to -- the reverse is much harder.

> Here's a quick reference for common prototype-to-production type transitions:

Reviewer 3: Good list. I'd like to add, that I sometimes catch myself dicking around with `impl IntoIterator<Item=T>` where `&[T]`/`Vec<T>` would do, or even worse, `impl Iterator<Item=&T>` (or a custom iterator :scream:) as a return type, where I should return a `Vec<T>`.

Not sure if that's a good thing to mention here. Might be more advanced than what the reader you're targeting here would think of on their own. And your existing list is strong as it is; maybe less focus would detract from that.

Author: Might make for a nice footnote? I'll add that.

Author: done

| Prototype        | Production          | When to switch                                                                     |
| ---------------- | ------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `String`         | `&str`              | When you need to avoid allocations or store string data with a clear lifetime      |
| `Vec<T>`         | `&[T]`              | When the owned vector becomes too expensive to clone or you can't afford the heap  |
| `Box<T>`         | `&T` or `&mut T`    | When `Box` becomes a bottleneck or you don't want to deal with heap allocations    | 
| `Rc<T>`          | `&T`                | When the reference counting overhead becomes too expensive or you need mutability  | 
| `Arc<Mutex<T>>`  | `&mut T`            | When you can guarantee exclusive access and don't need thread safety               |

These owned types sidestep most ownership and lifetime issues, but they do it by allocating memory on the heap - just like Python or JavaScript would.

You can always refactor when you actually need the performance or tighter resource usage, but chances are you won't.

> ### Make use of type inference

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Make Use of Type Inference
```

(Or leave it as-is and change the other ones. But mixing the two styles at the same level of header is weird.)

Author: True. Switching to sentence-case.

Rust is a statically, strongly typed language.
It would be a deal-breaker to write out all the types all the time if it weren't for Rust's type inference.

You can often omit (also called "elide") the types and let the compiler figure it out from the context.

```rust
let x = 42;
let y = "hello";
let z = vec![1, 2, 3];
```

This is a great way to get started quickly and defer the decision about types to later.
The system scales well with more complex types, so you can use this technique even in larger projects.

```rust
let x: Vec<i32> = vec![1, 2, 3];
let y: Vec<i32> = vec![4, 5, 6];

// Rust can infer the item type of z

> let z = x.iter().chain(y.iter()).collect::<Vec<_>>();

Reviewer 3: The bit about misconceptions by new Rust developers seems to imply, that this article is targeted at them. _I_ totally understand, that what you're referring to here as being inferred is the `_` bit, and that the `Vec` part is necessary for the `collect` and doesn't detract from your point. Will they?

Maybe flattening and creating a sum (with `for` or iterator adapters) could be a better example?

Author: True, but I don't expect all readers to understand that example. I want to convey the fact that Rust's type inference is able to handle tricky cases like these. Readers will be extremely excited about this fact. :)

```

Here's a more complex example which shows just how powerful Rust's type inference can be: 

```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

// Start with some nested data
let data = vec![
    ("fruits", vec!["apple", "banana"]),
    ("vegetables", vec!["carrot", "potato"]),
];

// Let Rust figure out this complex transformation
let categorized = data
    .into_iter()
    .flat_map(|(category, items)| {
        items.into_iter().map(move |item| (item, category))
    })

>     .collect::<HashMap<_, _>>();

Reviewer 3: The same point about `collect` from above applies here too.

Author: Yes. I could even make that a pub quiz: "What's the type of `categorized`"? Sounds fun. ^^

    let config_path = PathBuf::from(home).join(".config").join("myapp");
    
    // Create config directory if it doesn't exist
    fs::create_dir_all(&config_path).unwrap();
    
    // Read the config file, defaulting to empty string if it doesn't exist
    let config_file = config_path.join("config.json");
    let config_content = fs::read_to_string(&config_file)
        .unwrap_or_default();
    
    // Parse the JSON config
    let config: serde_json::Value = if !config_content.is_empty() {
        serde_json::from_str(&config_content).unwrap()
    } else {
        serde_json::json!({})
    };
    
    println!("Loaded config: {:?}", config);
}
```

See all those unwraps?
To more experienced Rustaceans, they stand out like a sore thumb -- and that's a good thing!

Compare that to languages like JavaScript which can throw exceptions your way at any time.
It's much harder to ensure that you handle all the edge-cases correctly.
At the very least, it costs time. Time you could spend on more important things.

While prototyping with Rust, you can safely ignore error handling and focus on
the happy path without losing track of improvement areas. 

> ### Use `bacon` for quick feedback cycles

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Use `bacon` for Quick Feedback Cycles
```

Rust is not a scripting language; there is a compile step!

However, for small projects, the compile times are negligible.
Unfortunately, you have to manually run `cargo check` every time you make a change 
or use [rust-analyzer](https://rust-analyzer.github.io/) in your editor to get instant feedback.

To fill the gap, you can use external tools like [`bacon`](https://github.com/Canop/bacon) which automatically recompiles and runs your code whenever you make a change.
This way, you can get *almost* the same experience as with a REPL in, say, Python or Ruby.

The setup is simple:

```sh
# Install bacon
cargo install --locked bacon

# Run bacon in your project directory
bacon
```

And just like that, you can get some pretty compilation output alongside your code editor.

![bacon](bacon.png)

Oh, and in case you were wondering, `cargo-watch` was another popular tool for
this purpose, but it's since been [deprecated](https://github.com/watchexec/cargo-watch#maintenance).

> ### `cargo-script` is awesome

Reviewer 3: This is going to read weird, if you apply capitalization consistently. Maybe a good argument for using sentence case for titles at this level, and use title case only for the `## Titles`.

Either way, this is going to be my last comment on this, even though you keep mixing styles further below too :smile:

Especially experienced developers coming from C or C++ are tempted to optimize too early.

Rust makes code perform well by default - you get memory safety at virtually zero runtime cost. When developers try to optimize too early, they often run up against the borrow checker by using complex lifetime annotations and intricate reference patterns in pursuit of better performance.
This leads to harder-to-maintain code that may not actually run faster.

Resist the urge to optimize too early!
You will thank yourself later. [^1]

[^1]: In the talk, I show an example where early over-optimization led to the wrong abstraction and made the code slower. The actual bottleneck was elsewhere and hard to uncover without profiling.

### Use `println!` and `dbg!` for debugging 

I find that printing values is pretty handy while prototyping.
It's one less context switch to make compared to starting a debugger.

Most people use `println!` for that, but [`dbg!`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/macro.dbg.html) has a few advantages:

- It prints the file name and line number where the macro is called. This helps you quickly find the source of the output.
- It outputs the expression as well as its value.

> - It's less syntax-heavy than `println!`; e.g. `dbg!(x)` vs. `println!("{x:?}")`.

Reviewer 3: The equivalent to `dbg!` is actually `println!("{x:#?}")` (which pretty-prints the debug output). Might be a bit too pedantic though. Mentioning it here would likely require at least a footnote.

> - It's only active in debug builds, so it has no performance impact for releases. 

Reviewer 3: I don't think this is true? First time I'm hearing of this, and a simple test just showed the opposite: I got `dbg!` output from a program I ran with `cargo run --release`.

Author: You're right. Thanks for pointing that out.
